DOCSP-28010: string operations (#342)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/aggregation/aggregation-expression-operations.txt

pattern, you can chain aggregation operations together to create code
that is both more compact and more naturally readable.

The methods in this guide provide an idiomatic way to implement the Query API,

> a framework that you can use to interact with your data. To learn more

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I'm not sure there are any other ways to interact with MongoDB, so maybe narrowing it down could make this more succinct:

```suggestion
the framework that lets the driver interact with MongoDB. To learn more
```

                                      then: "extreme temperature",
                                      else: "no advisory" } } } }

String Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can use string operations to examine and manipulate strings. You can

Reviewer: Suggestion:

For precision, maybe "measure" would work better. 

```suggestion
You can use string operations to measure and manipulate strings. You can
```

   * - `toLower() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toLower()>`__
     - :manual:`$toLower </reference/operator/aggregation/toLower/>`

   * - `toUpper() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toUpper()>`__
     - :manual:`$toUpper </reference/operator/aggregation/toUpper/>`

   * - `length() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#length()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenCP </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenCP/>`

   * - `lengthBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#lengthBytes()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenBytes/>`

   * - `substr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substr(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$substrCP </reference/operator/aggregation/substrCP/>`

   * - `substrBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substrBytes(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$substrBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/substrBytes/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

> The example creates a lowercase username from an employee's last
> name and employee ID.
> 
> The example concatenates the ``lastName`` and ``employeeID`` fields by
> using the ``append()`` method and makes this string lowercase by using
> the ``toLower()`` method. The resulting string is projected as the
> ``username`` field. The following code shows a pipeline stage for
> this aggregation:

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think it would be good to present the example as a hypothetical rather than refer to it as "the example" without any context.

```suggestion
For example, suppose you need to generate lowercase usernames
for employees of a company by concatenating their last name and
ID.

To concatenate the ``lastName`` and ``employeeID`` fields, use the
append() string operation method. To convert them to lowercase, use
the toLower() string operation method. Use the project() method to
surface the result in the username field.
 
The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:
```

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   Arrays.asList(project(fields(

>            computed("username",

Reviewer: Suggestion:
Not sure if necessary, but maybe explaining the fields() and computed() could help the user understand this.

                                      then: "extreme temperature",
                                      else: "no advisory" } } } }

String Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can use string operations to measure and manipulate strings. You can
perform a string operation on a value of type ``MqlString`` using the
methods described in this section.

The following table describes string operation methods
available in the driver and corresponding expression operators in the
Query API. The method names link to API documentation and the
aggregation pipeline operator names link to descriptions and examples in

> the Server manual documentation.

Author: Moving this to the overview

   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Java Method
     - Aggregation Pipeline Operator

   * - `append() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#append(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$concat </reference/operator/aggregation/concat/>`
       
   * - `toLower() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toLower()>`__
     - :manual:`$toLower </reference/operator/aggregation/toLower/>`

   * - `toUpper() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toUpper()>`__
     - :manual:`$toUpper </reference/operator/aggregation/toUpper/>`

   * - `length() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#length()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenCP </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenCP/>`

   * - `lengthBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#lengthBytes()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenBytes/>`

   * - `substr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substr(int,int)>`__

>      - :manual:`$substrCP </reference/operator/aggregation/substrCP/>`

Author: Since users are probably not reading this page to figure out which Query API operator to use, I don't think this is necessary to call out

   * - `substrBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substrBytes(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$substrBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/substrBytes/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Suppose you need to generate lowercase usernames for employees of a
company from the employees' last names and employee IDs.

To concatenate the ``lastName`` and ``employeeID`` fields,
use the ``append()`` method. To make the username lowercase, use the

> ``toLower()`` method. To output the result as the ``username`` field,
> use the ``project()`` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``toLower()`` method. 
```
The "boolean" section omits this point. (Should be consistent.)

Author: Leaving in to establish this as the new convention.

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

>    Arrays.asList(project(fields(

Author: going forwards, I think we should omit the variable assignment, as the `pipeline` variable is not used anywhere else.

           computed("username",
                   current()
                           .getString("lastName")
                           .append(current()
                                   .getString("employeeID"))
                           .toLower()
   ))));

The following code provides an equivalent expression in

> the Query API:

Author: fixed

                                      then: "extreme temperature",
                                      else: "no advisory" } } } }

String Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform a string operation on a value of type ``MqlString``
using the methods described in this section.

> The following table describes string methods

Reviewer: Suggestion:
To keep consistent with the terminology introduced in the previous sentence:

```suggestion
The following table describes string operation methods
```

available in the driver and corresponding expressions in the
Query API. The methods link to API documentation and the Query API

> expressions link to Server manual documentation.

Author: There are some methods of `MqlString` that we are classifying in other categories such as `parseDate`, which we are putting under Date Operations. Do you think users might be confused that there's not a 1:1 correspondence between the table and the API documentation if we just link to `MqlString`?

> expressions link to Server manual documentation.

Reviewer: I think the initial solution that you implemented works, so I'm resolving this conversation.

       
   * - `toLower() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toLower()>`__
     - :manual:`$toLower </reference/operator/aggregation/toLower/>`

   * - `toUpper() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#toUpper()>`__
     - :manual:`$toUpper </reference/operator/aggregation/toUpper/>`

   * - `length() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#length()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenCP </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenCP/>`

   * - `lengthBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#lengthBytes()>`__
     - :manual:`$strLenBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/strLenBytes/>`

   * - `substr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substr(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$substrCP </reference/operator/aggregation/substrCP/>`

   * - `substrBytes() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#substrBytes(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$substrBytes </reference/operator/aggregation/substrBytes/>`

> .. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Reviewer: From looking at this admonition, I was wondering whether we explained Query API on the page and it doesn't look like it. I think the first admonition on the page might benefit from an explanation of the term or link to one.

Author: after our conversation, I revised the first admonition on the page and converted it to regular text. I don't think the link in that tip admonition was useful, as individual operators are linked throughout the page.

   
The following example creates a unique employee username from their last

> name and unique employee ID. The code uses the ``append()`` method to

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think this can be made shorter as something unique appended with anything else should also be unique (except in special cases which this operation doesn't handle). I think it's ok to even leave out "unique" since that doesn't seem central to the append operation nor the understanding of it. E.g.

"This example generates a lowercase username from the employee's last name and their employee ID."

Then, the rest of the detailed information about what each operation does could be moved to a separate paragraph to provide a detailed breakdown.

concatenate the ``lastName`` and ``employeeID`` fields and makes this
string lowercase by using the ``toLower()`` method. The resulting

> string is projected as the ``username`` field:

Reviewer: Issue:
I expected to see a "resulting string" the way the code is introduced rather than the code snippet. The subject of the sentence introducing the code snippet should be the code snippet.

Suggestion:
From the previous comment on this paragraph, this could be restructured and then the code could be introduced as some form of:
"The pipeline for this example should resemble the following:"

Author: reworded

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

>    var pipeline = Arrays.asList(project(fields(

Reviewer: Suggestion:
I don't think the variable assignment helps here because there's no type, usage, or explanation of it. I think it would be fine to omit the variable assignment. E.g.
"Arrays.asList(project(fields(..."

           computed("username",
                   current()
                           .getString("lastName")
                           .append(current()
                                   .getString("employeeID"))
                           .toLower()
   ))));

The following code provides an equivalent expression in
the Query API:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

>    { $project: { username: { $toLower: { $concat: ["$lastName", "$employeeID"] } } } }

Reviewer: Question:
Did the team decide on code formatting (linebreaks, tabs, etc.) for Query API statements?
I think the manual uses line breaks to separate the operations (click on one of the Query API links you listed for examples). Could that formatting be used here to make it easier to read and conform with examples in the manual docs?

Reviewer: I'd use the server manual formatting and see if Maxim has any issues with that. I'd imagine he would be ok with their formatting since he suggested breaking it up more to avoid side-scrolling which is what the server docs does.

For clarification, here's [an example](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/aggregation/substr/) (starts with "db.inventory.aggregate(").
